
United States Patent ns]	un 3,800,034
Kircher et al.	[45] Mar. 26, 1974
[54]	METHOD FOR PREPARING PRESSED POWDER MAKEUP STICKS AND PRODUCT PRODUCED	
[75]	Inventors:	Charles R. Kircher, Milwaukee, Wis.; Richard L. Kole, Port Jervis, N.Y.
[73]	Assignee:	Kolman Laboratories, Inc., Port Jervis, N.Y.
[22]	Filed:	Dec. 28, 1970
[21]	Appl. No.:	102,202
[63]	Related U.S. Application Data Continuation-in-part of Ser. No. 785,371, Dec. 19,	
1968,abandoned.
[52] U.S. Cl............. 424/63, 424/64, 424/69,
424/DIG. 5
[51] Int. Cl..........................A61k 7/02
[58] Field of Search.......... 424/63, DIG. 5, 69 56
[56]	References Cited
UNITED STATES PATENTS
1,655,369	1/1928	Helfrich...........   424/63
3,196,079	7/1965	Blaustein............. 424/63
3,296,078	1/1967	Kaye et al............ 424/63
FOREIGN PATENTS OR APPLICATIONS
829,367	3/1938.	France................ 424/63
OTHER PUBLICATIONS Chemical Abstracts, Vol. 51, Item 18485h, 1957.
Sagarin, Cosmetics, Science and Technology, pp. 246-247, 255-261, 484-485, Interscience Publishers, Inc., N.Y., 1957.
Primary Examiner—Sam Rosen
Assistant Examiner—Anna P. Fagelson
Attorney, Agent, or Firm—Andrus, Sceales, Starke &
Sawall
[57]	ABSTRACT
A cosmetic makeup composition in the form of a dry pressed powder stick. The dry composition is composed of finely divided, generally inert materials, including 40 percent to 90 percent by weight of chalk, colorants, and a binder. To prepare the composition, the finely divided material and colorants are mixed with an aqueous solution of the binder to provide a granulated mixture. After thoroughly mixing, the mixture is preferably extruded into stick form and dried to evaporate the water. The stick is dried at a slow rate, causing a migration of the binder toward the outer surface of the stick so that the outer surface has a higher content of binder than the central portion of the stick. The resulting dry powder stick has a high cohesive strength and improved “pay-off’ when applied to the skin.
7 Claims, No Drawings
3,800,034
2
1
METHOD FOR PREPARING PRESSED POWDER
MAKEUP STICKS AND PRODUCT PRODUCED
BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION
This application is a continuation-in-part of application Ser. No. 785,371, filed Dec. 19, 1968 now abandoned.
This invention relates to a cosmetic makeup composition and more particularly to a makeup composition in the form of a dry, pressed powder stick.
In the past eye shadows have generally taken the form of grease sticks, creams or pressed powder cakes. Grease sticks, having a grease or oil base are messy to use and smear easily on the skin, while creams have the disadvantage that they must be applied with the finger and also tend to smear easily. While eye shadows in the form of pressed powder cakes are not as messy to apply as grease sticks or creams, the pressed powder cake cannot be applied directly to the skin but requires application with a brush, puff, or other applicator. The reason that the common pressed powder cake formulation cannot be applied directly to the skin is lack of adequate “pay-off.” The skin is relatively smooth and is often oily due to natural oils or a previously applied cosmetic base. Thus the normal pressed powder cake formulation, if applied to the skin, will absorb moisture and oil and quickly glaze over with the result that there is an inadequate “pay-off’ of the powder on the skin. Because of this, applicators are used with pressed powder cakes, and by use of the applicator, which is more abrasive than human skin, the powder can be removed and then transferred from the applicator to the skin. Therefore, in the past, eye shadows have not been employed in the form of pressed powder sticks due to the lack of strength in the dry stick as well as inadequate “pay-off” on the skin.
SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION
The present invention is directed to a pressed powder cosmetic makeup stick having improved pay-off and minimum drag or pull on the skin, as well as an improved cosmetic feel. The composition includes a substantial portion of chalk along with colorants, powdered inert materials and a binder. The composition is preferably formed into a stick by an extrusion process wherein the dry materials are mixed with a liquid carrier, preferably water, and the mixture is then extruded into the form of a stick or rod. The extruded stick is slowly dried to equilibrium moisture conditions with the atmosphere, and during this controlled drying process the binder tends to migrate toward the outer surface of the stick to provide a dried product having a high strength outer skin and a softer core having increased “pay-off.”
DESCRIPTION OF THE PREFERRED EMBODIMENT
The dry cosmetic makeup composition in general has the following formulation in weight percent:
Chalk	40 to 90%
Colorants	Up to 20%
Binder	0.10 to 5%
Finely divided inert materials	Balance
The preferred range of composition of the pressed powder stick in weight percent is as follows:
Chalk	45 to 70%
Colorants	5 to 15%
Binder	0.15 to 2%
Finely divided inert materials	Balance
The high concentration of chalk (calcium carbonate) is important in the formulation, for the physical nature of the chalk particles acts to improve the strength of the stick, as well as controlling the absorbency of the stick so that there is less likelihood of the stick absorbing moisture and oil from the skin, and thus the tendency of the stick to glaze-over is reduced and the “pay-off on the skin is improved.
The powdered or finely divided material to be used in the composition takes the form of conventional powders used in cosmetic products, such as magnesium carbonate; clays such as bentonite, kaolin and china clay; metal stearates such as zinc, aluminum, magnesium, potassium and lithium stearate; titanium dioxide; zinc oxide, talc; starches; starch derivatives; and the like.
The binder which serves to bind the powdered materials together and provides the necessary strength for the stick is selected from natural or synthetic materials, such as gum tragacanth; gum arabic; gum acacia; car-boxymethyl cellulose; sodium carboxymethyl cellulose; methyl cellulose; ethyl cellulose; gelatin; lignin; polyvinyl pyrrolidone; polyvinyl acetate; complex magnesium aluminum silicate (sold under the name of Veegum by the R. T. Vanderbilt Company), carboxy vinyl polymer (sold under the name of Carbopol by B. G. Goodrich Chemical Company), and the like.
The colorants are those commonly used in cosmetic products and may take the form of inorganic pigments such as iron oxide, titanium dioxide; yellow ochre, red iron oxide; ultramarine blue, chromium oxide green; iron black; and lamp black. When the composition is to be used on the skin in locations other than in the area of the eyes organic pigments such as D & C Red Nos. 9, 19, 10, 11 and 12; and D & C yellow No. 5, may also be used. In addition, natural and synthetic pearlescent materials can also be employed with or without other colorants.
The titanium dioxide can provide a dual function in that it serves as a constituent of the powder base, as well as providing opaque characteristics for a colored stick, while in the case of a white stick, it serves as the primary colorant.
In some instances, it may also be desirable to incorporate a lubricant in the composition which aids in extruding, or otherwise forming, the composition into stick form, as well as improving the adherence and application of the composition to the skin. The lubricant can be employed in an amount from 0.1 percent to 7.5 percent by weight of the dry composition, and may take the form of metal stearates, such as zinc, aluminum, magnesium, potassium, or lithium stearate; liquid paraffin; fatty alcohols such as cetyl or stearyl; fatty acids such as stearic and palmitic; soap powder; vegetable and hydrogenated oils; and the like. In the formulation the metal stearates function not only as a lubricant but also as a constitutent of the powder base. The use of a lubricant is important when the mixture is extruded into stick form, for the dry materials, and particularly chalk, are highly abrasive and the incorporation of a lubricant facilitates the extrusion operation.
Preservatives or bactericides can also be incorporated in the composition in an amount up to 2 percent
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
3,800,034
3
with the particular amount depending on the preservative employed. Examples Of preservatives which are commonly used in cosmetic products and can be included in the composition of the invention are hydroxy benzoate esters; hexachlorophene, dichlorophene; and the like.
Furthermore, perfumes in an amount up to 1.5 percent can also be used in the composition.
It is preferred to form the composition into stick form by an extrusion process, wherein the dry materials are mixed with a liquid carrier and the mixture is then extruded into the form of a continuous stick or rod. Water is preferred as the carrier but other evaporable liquids can be substituted. The particular carrier used is not critical, for in forming the dry stick the carrier is evaporated and is not present in the final product. In order to provide a mixture having the proper characteristics to be extruded it is important that the amount of water be maintained within certain limits. Sufficient water should be used to granulate the dry ingredients, and the specific amount of water to be employed for extrusion depends on the absorption characteristics of the dry ingredients, but generally, the water will comprise from 20 percent to 35 percent by weight of the total weight of the water and dry ingredients. The term “granulate” refers to the physical state of the mixture in which the individual particles or grains of the dry materials are combined in the form of relatively uniformly sized agglomerates or balls which are moist to the touch. It has been found that the granulated form is necessary to a commercially successful extrusion operation, for in this physical state the highly abrasive materials can be extruded and yet the extruded stick or rod will retain its shape without crumbling or cracking. Lesser amounts of water, in the range of 8 percent to 13 percent by weight of the total weight of the water and dry ingredients, are used in the event the stick is formed by pressing or molding operations rather than extrusion.
In the preferred method of forining the dry powder stick, the dry ingredients are initially mixed together and subsequently an aqueous binder solution is thoroughly mixed with the dry materials. After the solution is thoroughly mixed with the dry materials to form a granulated mixture, the mixture is extruded into the form of a continuous rod. The rod is cut to form sticks of desired length, and the sticks are then dried to evaporate the water or other carrier, and subsequently packaged.
It is important that the extruded stick be dried slowly to equilibrium conditions with the atmosphere. While the drying rate is dependent on a number of factors such as the cross sectional area of the stick, and the relative humidity and temperature of the drying medium, it has been found that the stick should be dried to equilibrium conditions with the atmosphere in a period of not less than 12 hours. During this slow drying operation, the binder tends to migrate toward the outer surface of the stick so that the binder content progressively increases from the center of the stick to the outer surface. Faster drying rates inhibit this binder migration. The increased binder content on the outer surface produces a harder, high strength outer skin, while the decreased binder content in the center portion results in a softer core having better “pay-off.” This structure has decided advantages for a cosmetic makeup stick, for the higher strength outer skin provides a cohesive
4
protective shield permitting the stick to be applied directly to the skin without cracking or fracturing, and the softer core enables the powder to “pay-off” readily on the skin, so that the composition can be applied to delicate areas of the skin such as the eyelids without undue pressure. Moreover, the stick, when applied to the skin, exerts a minimum drag or pull and has a definite cosmetic feel. The stick has controlled absorbtion characteristics so that moisture and oils from the skin are less likely to be absorbed, thereby decreasing the tendency for the stick to become “glazed-over” during use.
The pressed powder stick provides a matte, non-greasy finish on the skin which will not smear as do greases and creams. Furthermore, as the makeup composition is in stick form, it can be applied directly to the skin without the need of brushes and without soiling the fingers.
While the stick has particular application as an eye shadow, it can also be employed as a face makeup, an eyebrow makeup or a hair tint.
Specific examples of the preparation of dry powdered stick of the invention are as follows:
EXAMPLE NO. 1
Eye Shadow
The following materials were mixed together in parts by weight:
Corn Starch	2.0
Kaolin	5.0
Talc	20.0
Chalk	43.0
Titanium dioxide	20.0
Ultramarine blue	10.0
75 parts of the dry mixture were mixed with 24.55 parts of water and 0.45 parts of Veegum as a binder. After thoroughly mixing the ingredients, the resulting granulated mixture was extruded into a continuous rod which was cut at intervals to provide sticks having a blue color. After drying for 24 hours at room temperature, the sticks were packaged.
EXAMPLE NO. 2
Eye Shadow
A dry mixture was formed by mixing the following ingredients in parts by weight:
Starch	2.0
Kaolin	5.0
Talc	20.0
Chalk	43.0
Titanium dioxide	5.0
Chromium oxide green	15.0
78.20 parts of the dry mixture were then mixed with 21.30 parts of water and 0.50 parts of Veegum. After thoroughly mixing, the resultant granulated mixture was extruded into a continuous rod. The rod was subsequently cut into sticks having a green color. After drying for 24 hours the sticks were packaged.
EXAMPLE NO. 3
Eye Shadow
A dry mixture was prepared by mixing the following ingredients in parts by weight:
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
5
3,800,034
Kaolin	5.0
Talc	39.0
Chalk	40.0
Titanium dioxide	5.0
Brown iron oxide	10.0
Lamp black	1.0
76 parts by weight of the mixture were mixed with 24 parts b.y weight of a binder composition. The binder composition consisted of 50% of a 2.0% water solution of gum tragacanth and 50% by weight of a 2.0% water solution of a carboxymethyl cellulose. After mixing with the binder solution, the granulated mixture was extruded into the form of a continuous rod. The rod was cut at intervals to provide sticks having a brown color. After drying to evaporate the water, the sticks were packaged.
EXAMPLE NO. 4
Face Makeup
The following ingredients were mixed together in parts by weight: 60
Calcium carbonate	55.00
Talc	26.50
Titanium dioxide	8.00
Corn starch	2.25
Kaolin	5.50
Zinc stearate	2.50
Para hydroxy benzoate	0.25
esters Yellow ochre	1.00
Red iron oxide	0.75
Brown iron oxide	0.10
65 parts by weight of the mixture was added to 35 parts by weight of a 1.4% aqueous solution of Veegum. The binder solution was thoroughly mixed with the dry ingredients to provide a granulated mixture which was subsequently extruded, dried and packaged.	
EXAMPLE NO. 5	
Face Makeup The following ingredients	were mixed together in
parts by weight to provide a	dry mixture:
Calcium carbonate	61.80
Titanium dioxide	12.00
Kaolin	6.00
Magnesium stearate	5.00
Talc	15.00
Hexachlorophene	0.20
D & C Red No. 19	0.10
D & C Red No. 12	0.50
D & C Red No. 10	2.00
60 parts by weight of the mixture was then mixed with 40 parts by weight of a binder solution consisting of a
1	% aqueous solution of carboxymethyl cellulose. After thoroughly mixing the binder solution with the dry materials, the resulting mixture was extruded into rod form, cut into sticks, dried and packaged.
EXAMPLE NO. 6
Eye Shadow
A dry mixture was prepared in accordance with the formulation of Example No. 2. 89 parts of the dry mixture were then mixed with 10 parts of water and 1 part of Veegum. After thoroughly mixing the mixture was molded into a series of sticks. The sticks were then dried and packaged.
Various modes of carrying out the invention are contemplated as being within the scope of the following claims particularly pointing out and distinctly claiming the subject matter which is regarded as the invention.
We claim:
1.	A method of forming a dry pressed powder cosmetic makeup stick, comprising the steps of mixing a dry finely divided composition with a liquid carrier to provide a mixture, said dry composition comprising from 40% to 90% by weight of chalk, cosmetically effective amount of colorants up to about 20 percent by weight, from 0.1% to 5.0% by weight of a cosmetic-powder binder, and the balance being dry powdered cosmetically compatible materials, forming the mixture into a stick, and drying the stick to evaporate the carrier at a rate such that the moisture content of the stick reaches equilibrium with the moisture content of the atmosphere, said drying rate being sufficiently slow to cause a migration of the binder toward the outer surface of the stick, so that the outer surface of the stick has a higher content of binder than the central portion of said stick.
2.	The method of claim 1, wherein said liquid carrier is water.
3.	The method of claim 2, wherein the water is present in an amount of 20% to 35% by weight of the total weight of the dry composition and the water, said mixture being formed into stick form by extrusion.
4.	The method of claim 3, wherein said composition further includes from 0.1% to 7.5% of a lubricant.
5.	The method of claim 1, wherein said binder is a mixture of gum tragacanth and carboxymethyl cellulose.
6.	The method of claim 1, wherein said dry composition includes titanium dioxide, said titanium dioxide functioning as a portion of said finely divided material as well as a colorant.
7.	The dry pressed powder cosmetic makeup stick prepared by the method of claim 1.
5ft *	*	*	*
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
65.
UNITED STATES PATENT OFFICE
CERTIFICATE of correction
Patent No,	3.800034	____________Dated________=«Ma-rr»h	107/,
Inventor(s)_CHARLES R. ..KIRCHE.R. .and RID ARP L. KQLE
It is certified that error appears in the above-identified patent and that said Letters Patent are hereby corrected as shown below:
On Cover Page, AFter ’'Assignee;” Cancel "Kolman Laboratories, Inc." and substitute therefor ---KOLMAR LABORATORIES, INC.---
Signed and sealed this 1st day of October 1974.
(SEAL)
Attest:
McCOY K, GIBSON JR.	C. MARSHALL DANN
Attesting officer	Commissioner of Patents

i
!
i
i
